## 0.7.0 (Unreleased)

TEXT SUPPORT

0.7.0 introduces **text support** into z2d!!!

The initial support allows the loading of fonts from a file or external buffer
and rendering of text for what should be most basic Latin characters. This
includes diacritics and composite glyphs. Additionally, proper kerning is
supported (through modern `GPOS` or legacy `kern` data)!

This support will be expanded on an as-needed and future version basis,
balancing what is on the roadmap with any requests that are made. The only
current thing that is likely off the table for the time being is loading fonts
via a font enumeration/substitution tool (such as fontconfig).

Note that currently only whole TrueType/OpenType files are supported, no font
collections (this will be added later, more than likely).

To use text support, check out the new `setFontToFile`, `setFontToBuffer`,
`setFontSize`, and `showText` functions in the `Context`. Additionally, check
out the `Font` type and `text` package to work with text in the unmanaged
interface.

ENHANCEMENTS:

* The compositor now uses shuffling to transfer data into and out of vectors.
  [#126](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/126)

BUG FIXES:

* Downsampling a surface no longer can produce a zero-length buffer surface.
  [#124](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/124)

## 0.6.2 (May 21, 2025)

ENHANCEMENTS:

* Surfaces can no longer have dimensions that would ultimately result in
  an zero-size surface. [#107](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/107)

* Added additional checks in the painter during composition to make sure that
  the polygon(s) to draw will be in the bounds of the destination surface. This
  adds additional validation and safety surrounding special cases and avoids
  unnecessary work. [#106](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/106)

* Additional internal changes to the painter, surface, and compositor to ensure
  safety.
  [#108](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/108),
  [#109](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/109),
  [#110](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/110)
  [#111](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/111),
  [#114](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/114),
  [#115](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/115),
  [#117](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/117)

BUG FIXES:

* Corrected an issue with strokes when handling the special case where a
  `lineTo` was made to the initial point right before the `closePath`.
  [#119](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/119)

* Corrected an issue with dashed lines when connecting multi-corner closed
  segments with an initial segment.
  [#118](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/118)

## 0.6.1 (April 25, 2025)

BUG FIXES:

* Added a bit of tolerance to fix stroke operations where some line joins are
  at such a small slope difference that floating-point error would cause them
  to be considered parallel. [#102](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/102)
* Fixed integer casting for working with large-dimension surfaces.
  [#101](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/101)

SECURITY:

* Fixed an issue where composition of a surface that would be completely
  out-of-bounds on the x-axis (but in-bounds on the y-axis) was causing a
  stride length overflow. [#105](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/105)
    - This has been marked as a security vulnerability due to its potential for
      invalid memory access or corruption in unsafe release modes. More detail
      in [GHSA-mm4c-p35v-7hx3](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/security/advisories/GHSA-mm4c-p35v-7hx3).
      Those using z2d after v0.5.1 and before v0.6.1 (including non-tagged
      versions between) are recommended to update to 0.6.1. If you are still on
      Zig 0.13.0, the advice is to downgrade to v0.5.1, the last unaffected
      tagged version.

## 0.6.0 (March 22, 2025)

ZIG 0.14.0 REQUIRED

Version 0.6.0 now requires Zig 0.14.0. Those requiring Zig 0.13.0 must use
version 0.5.1 or earlier (for details, see the security notes for 0.6.1).

GRADIENTS

This release marks another major feature addition for z2d - the addition of
gradients to the library. Consumers can now utilize linear, radial, and conic
gradients as patterns for filling, stroking, and lower-level composition (see
below for details on the lower-level compositor changes that make this
possible).

Consult the documentation and some of the examples in `spec/` for details on
using gradients.

COLOR

The higher-level `Color` interface and `color` package have been introduced as
a means to provide color to pixel sources (gradients, single-pixel sources,
etc). Colors can be provided in different color spaces; rectangular ones such
as RGB, or polar ones such as HSL. Gamma-corrected RGB is also included,
currently, sRGB is the one color space supplied here, but others will follow in
future releases.

DITHERING

Along with gradients, support for dithering has been added (for both opaque and
gradient sources, with more to come as more sources are added). The most
current practical use is to reduce any possible banding that comes from the use
of certain gradients.

Currently ordered dither methods are supported, using a Bayer 8x8 or 64x64 blue
noise matrix.

Dithering can be accessed via using `setDither` in a context, or wrapping the
pattern to be dithered in the special dither pattern in either direct paint or
the compositor.

MAJOR COMPOSITOR CHANGES

This release also brings some major compositor changes to accommodate the
addition of gradients and additional blend modes.

`Surface` and `Pixel` now have a general `composite` function that applies any
particular compositor operator (e.g., `.dst_in` or `.src_over`) to surfaces and
pixels. The respective individual `dstIn` and `srcOver` functions available on
surfaces and all pixel types have been removed in favor of this.

The `composite` functions are aliased to a batch function in the `compositor`
package, which allows access to a multi-step compositor that you can use to
apply multiple steps to a set of surfaces and pixels without needing to be
written back to memory first (more on how we currently use this below).

28 compositor operators are now available for use. They can be set for fill and
stroke by using `Context.setOperator`, or by using respective fields in
`painter.fill` and `painter.stroke`. Some operators are unbounded when being
used in fill and stroke, which means they will remove the unaffected
destination when drawing; these are noted in the description for each operator.
Note that when using the lower level compositor functions, all operators are
bounded. Additionally, some operators require floating-point precision and
hence will be slower; in most situations this is automatically managed, but it
can be changed with `Context.setPrecision` if need be. Note that this is only
really useful for forcing floating-point precision, versus the other way
around, due to possible overriding.

PIXEL STRIDES

`Stride` has now been added to the `pixel` package. This provides a lightweight
interface to slices of actual pixel data that can be fetched and worked with
using `getStride` and other functions in `Surface`.

For packed types, additional metadata such as the start index and the length in
pixels are provided (you can also reflect the union field to get access to the
pixel type).

Pixel data in strides can be manipulated directly to alter the data that they
reference. They are ultimately a lower-level interface than `getPixel` and
`setPixel`, so keep that in mind when using them and watch out for undefined
behavior.

PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENTS

The compositor changes and the addition of strides have allowed a rewrite of
compositor functions to process data on a stride (line-by-line for the most
part) basis, and also to have these operations vectorized. This has led to
significant performance improvements on modern hardware - between 20-40%
depending on the case.

In addition, the multi-step compositor also removes the need for the additional
RGBA surface that we use along with the mask to create a final image when being
used with anti-aliasing. This is a significant RAM savings.

More details for everything above can be found in the compositor PR
[#75](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/75).

OTHER CHANGES

* `Context.init` no longer returns errors, and `Path` can now be initialized
  off the zero value.
* `setSource` and `getSource` now take and return `Pattern` types specifically,
  instead of pixels. This is to accommodate gradients; you can still set pixel
  data directly as a source using `setSourceToPixel`.
* `fromPixel` in its form before 0.6.0 has been replaced with the functionality
  that was previously in `copySrc`, meaning that this is now the pixel
  conversion function. If you need to unwrap a `Pixel` from now on, the
  recommended method is just via accessing the appropriate field within the
  union (e.g., `px.rgba`).
* PNG exporting now has options for setting the gamma value during the export
  process by selecting the RGB profile. When set, the correct gamma chunk will
  be added to the encoded PNG file, in addition to applying gamma correction to
  the PNG datastream when applicable. The default will continue to be no gamma
  handling, that is, no gamma chunk or correction added.
* PNG exporting has been updated to stream data in larger chunks. This has
  improved performance of the exporting process (faster export, smaller file
  sizes).

## 0.5.1 (January 19, 2025)

BUG FIXES:

* Supplying a dash array of entirely zeros for stroking will now correctly
  ignore it. [#74](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/74)

## 0.5.0 (January 19, 2025)

DASHED LINES

0.5.0 brings support for dashed lines, allowing one to supply a dash pattern (a
series of alternating on-off segment lengths) to `setDashes` in `Context` (and
subsequently the unmanaged `painter.stroke` function) for stroking.
`setDashOffset` can be used as well to specify an offset to allow for
fine-tuning of the dash pattern with a particular shape.

More details can be found in the documentation and
[#70](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/70).

OTHER IMPROVEMENTS:

* 1, 2, and 4-bit alpha pixel types are now supported. Optimizations exist for
  these pixel formats when using them with surfaces.
  [#61](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/61),
  [#62](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/62),
  [#68](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/68) (the latter PR supersedes
  the `PackedIntSliceEndian` portion of #61, which is being removed in Zig
  0.14.0)
* PNG export now supports alpha surfaces, which are just exported to greyscale.
  [#60](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/60)
* Memory model changes to the polygon plotting portion of the rasterizer.
  [#64](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/64)
  [#67](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/67) 

BUG FIXES:

* Path: relative helpers now correctly operate in user space when using
  transformations. [#69](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/69)

## 0.4.0 (November 13, 2024)

This release introduces large changes to the layout of the library to better
define the lines between _managed_ and _unmanaged_ architecture, similar to
Zig's memory-centric use of the terms.

UNMANAGED API

**All individual components of z2d now operate under an unmanaged model**. This
especially goes for `Surface` and `Path`, which used to hold allocators in the
past, but no longer do. Both `Surface` and `Path` now offer static buffer
capabilities as well, allowing one to deal with allocation through other means
if one desires. Static buffer methods are almost entirely infallible (save some
checking that needs to be done for current points in `Path`).

`StaticPath` has also been introduced as a shorthand to working with a static
buffer `Path`. This wraps a buffer of a particular length so that you don't
have to declare one separately. Additionally, all methods in `StaticPath` are
100% infallible, with ones that would normally return non-memory errors causing
safety-checked undefined behavior in the event these errors would be returned.

The new unmanaged API also introduces the new `painter` package, allowing you
to do fill or stroke operations without needing to use a `Context`.

THE NEW MANAGED CONTEXT

`Context` has now been completely overhauled to take the role as the sole
managed component in z2d. It holds a `Path` of its own along with the `Surface`
and `Pattern` that it did before 0.4.0, and more directly synchronizes settings
that are common to both path-level operations and fill/stroke, such as
transformation matrices and tolerance. Getters and setters exist for every
operation and it is now considered incorrect behavior to have to manipulate
context fields directly.

Most folks should be good using `Context` for day-to-day operations, but if you
require more control (or wish to use the static buffer API), it exists as a
reference example of how you can use the unmanaged API yourself.

EXPLICIT ERROR SETS

All API calls now have explicit error sets defined. The error sets have been
defined with a granularity suiting the nature of the package. Most of the time,
memory errors are not a member of our library-level sets and are merged at the
site of the signature - this is for both readability and usability (e.g.,
`Path.Error` can be returned on memory-infallible methods).

As part of this work, the global `errors` package has been removed and errors
are now located within their respective structs or packages.

## 0.3.1 (November 1, 2024)

BUG FIXES:

* internal: removed the configurable edge FBA in the painter, in favor of a
  small static FBA in a `StaticFallbackAllocator`.
  [#53](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/53)

## 0.3.0 (October 25, 2024)

TRANSFORMATION SUPPORT

0.3.0 adds support for transformations, both for `Path` and `Context`.

Transformations are represented by the traditional affine transformation matrix:

```
[ ax by tx ]
[ cx dy ty ]
[  0  0  1 ]
```

Where the `ax`, `by`, `cx`, and `dy` values represent rotate, scale, and skew,
and `tx` and `ty` represent translation.

We currently offer operations for `rotate`, `scale`, and `translate` via
methods on the transformation, other operations need to be composed on the
existing transformation via the `mul` and `inverse` methods. Additional methods
exist for converting co-ordinates from provided, un-transformed units (hereby
referred to as being in _user space_) into transformed ones (hereby referred to
as being in _device space_).

Transformations affect drawing in different ways depending on where they are
applied:

* When set in a `Path`, transformations affect co-ordinates being plotted.
  Co-ordinates passed in to `moveTo`, `lineTo`, etc., are expected to be passed
  in as user space and are transformed and recorded in device space. The
  transformation can be changed in the middle of setting points; this changes
  the device space for recorded points going forward, not the ones already
  recorded. This is ultimately how you will draw ellipses with the `arc`
  command, and an abridged example now exists for drawing an ellipse by saving
  the current transformation matrix (CTM) for a path, adding `translate` and
  `scale`, executing `arc`, and restoring the saved CTM.
* When set in a `Context`, transformations mainly affect scaling and warping of
  strokes according to the set `line_width` (which needs to be scaled with
  `deviceToUserDistance` prior to stroking in order to get the expected line
  width). This will be mostly obvious when working with a warping scale where
  the major axis will look thicker. Transformations currently _do not_ affect
  filling.
* Currently, synchronization of a `Context` and `Path` transformation is an
  exercise left to the consumer.

Eventually, transformations will be extended to patterns when we implement more
than the simple single-pixel pattern, likely being simple raster
transformations on the source w/appropriate filtering/interpolation.
Additionally, it's expected that a transformation set in the `Context` will
also affect line dashing when it is implemented, through transformation of the
dash pattern, and also affecting the capping as per normal stroking.

IMPROVEMENTS:

* internal: memory optimizations for the painter (mostly AA).
   - [#50](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/50)
   - Depending on the pixel source being used, this PR results in between 11%-55%
     less RAM used by AA rasterization based on the lack of extra allocations.
     Note that this is a theoretical estimate. YMMV, see the PR for more
     details and benchmarks.

BUG FIXES:

* internal: fix offset calculations for AA composition
  [#46](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/46)
* internal: ignore degenerate line_to when filling/stroking
  [#47](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/47)

## 0.2.0 (August 30, 2024)

FEATURES:

* New relative path `Path` helpers have been added: `relMoveTo`, `relLineTo`, and
  `relCurveTo`. [#35](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/35)
* Support for drawing arcs has been added to `Path`. Note that this only draws
  circles at the moment, ellipses will follow after transformation support has
  been added. [#36](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/36)
* Support for zero-length strokes. Only round cap behavior has been is
  available at the moment, square cap behavior will be added with dashed
  strokes.
  [0a040b0](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/commit/0a040b0ba4f9dd059fdc5de5b0be4af305badf79)

BUG FIXES:

* internal: ensure incomplete polygons are not returned for filling
  [#31](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/31)
* Various stroke drawing fixes.
  ([5cf163c](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/commit/5cf163c26e0bb8e4b341b83d65936f7a827033e2),
  [#38](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/38),
  [#39](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/pull/39),
  [155619d](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/commit/155619d27d392ad7a184c0deac0e0d9785d950fe),
  [77b1d51](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/commit/77b1d51636c806041f644ff798bf6b71553675f1),
  [68fd801](https://github.com/vancluever/z2d/commit/68fd80169265b95b7e1fd455f29850e694c09d3d))

## 0.1.0 (April 23, 2024)

Initial release.
